Richard Rodman, who had gone to the Peace Corps in
Ecuador, he actually married an Ecuadorian girl
later on and went in to work with the United States
Agency for International Development. And so he
kind of made a life of foreign service. And I think a
lot of people really continued to seek different
kinds of opportunities in international
settings after their Peace Corps work. A lot of
them went back and did work in Washington, D.C. in
various parts of government programs.
What was the one memory or feeling that most stood
out about your whole experience
in Peace Corps? Or two or three memories. I'm sure
there are several. Let's see, one simple memory.
Well, of course, it's always something that
indelibly
is in your mind when you live through a shooting
revolution. And when we first got there, we were
very idealistic. And when the shooting war
actually broke out, And we had to get behind
mattresses that were propped against the walls.
And you could actually see tracer bullets go
flying across the valley. And actually, one
military post was shooting at another.
this kind of
you hear planes flying overhead and bombing and
you realize that you're actually part of this
thing. I guess it was pretty terrorizing. Then
later when they had the daily
I guess the curfew and I would go out in the late
afternoon. One time I stayed a little bit too late
at one place and I had to go back and get to my
family's house. I had to dodge behind a wall. At one
point I was challenged by a guard at a corner down
the valley and he actually wheeled around and
fired a couple shots in my direction and so I had to
dive behind this adobe wall to avoid being shot. I
sort of crept along like a an outlaw and eventually
got back to the house that I was living in. But it was
just kind of this kind of tension and it's almost
like being in a war zone. How it all started, I think
that was very difficult to live with. And then as
things began to settle down, I guess the real charm
of the Bolivians started to come out. And overall,
they were very hospitable people. They would
invite you into their home. And they'd really give
you everything that they have or let you share
everything that they have. I think we had really a
lot of positive interaction with the people
themselves. We made a lot of friends within the
Bolivian community. We wrote letters to them many
years after that. You know, it's just one of those
kind of things where you have those memories for
forever. And of course, you know, just being
married in a country like that, this whole setting
is almost like out of a storybook.
But I don't know if there's any one They
were good things and bad things. We generally took
advantage of every opportunity when we would have
a weekend free or something to go and see as much of
the country as possible. And a lot of times we would
just go out to the town square and very early in the
morning, They had these big trucks that would be
going off to various places like once we went to
Chulamani. We would just go there and the people
that were loading up the trucks, they would tell
you where they're going. And then so you just climb
on the back of the truck and you pay them a small fee
for taking you there. And by the time you actually
got there, they would stop along the way and pick up
other people. There may be a dozen people in the
back of one of these trucks by the time it actually
gets there. They just have big canvas flaps over
them so if it rains or whatever then they can at
least keep the people dry. But that was one of the
main modes of transportation. You just jumped on
the back of one of these trucks and off you go.
During the trip itself, they would, you know,
they'd have, like, some of their potatoes that are
these dried potatoes, they're called chunyo, and
they would have these wrapped up in their bundles
on their back, and at some point they would get out
their stuff, and everybody would be sharing all
their food, so they'd pass around the chunyo and
their various... little tidbits of snacks that
they would have. And they'd just share it all
around with everyone that was on the truck ride. So
it was really a very simple type of existence. And
you just see that the level of trusting of the
people at that time was very genuine. It may not be
like that today, particularly with all of the
stress of the cocaine trade and the shining path,
the gorillas, these sendero luminosos that are
there stirring up additional problems in the
countryside, people would probably not be as open
as they were back in the mid-60s. Maybe those times
are gone forever, but it just seemed like they were
almost so willing to accept foreigners and treat
you like any member of their community. share
whatever they have and sort of be very open. Maybe
it was just their naive way of looking at things,
but it was kind of refreshing. It's almost like
living in a very small town in the USA or
something. That's one thing that we definitely
will probably remember about our Peace Corps
experience. Did you ever worry about getting sick
when you ate the native foods? Well, you always had
to worry about being sick. The water had to be
boiled and also had to be filtered. Yet, when you
went someplace, like you were at a faculty get
together and somebody offered you water, you
never were really sure, you know, was this boiled
or was it not boiled. And eventually, playing
these kind of games, you wound up getting amoebic
dysentery or you would get some kind of parasites.
My wife had amoebic dysentery while she was
pregnant and the medication that you had to take in
order to kill the amoebas that were eating in her
liver were also very dangerous and could cause
some kind of difficulties for the for the
pregnancy itself may even cause abnormal
abnormalities in the fetus and so we had a lot of
sort of stress and tension during pregnancy not
knowing you know how it was going to work out and
then as you recall from The actual birth
experience itself, when the other girl and her
baby died on the same night that our first son was
born, it was almost a miracle that this little
five-pound infant was able to survive in that kind
of a primitive setting.
But it all worked out. Just one more question. When
you returned to the, finally returned to the
States, was there a strong sense of culture shock?
What did you view differently?
When we first came back, we stopped in Panama. My
wife had grown up in the Panama Canal Zone and she
wanted me to see Panama and some of the area that she
grew up in. So we flew into Panama and we stayed in an
apartment that was a friend of hers in Panama. She
was away on vacation, so she just let us drive her
car and stay in her apartment. We had been so
accustomed to living almost like from hand to
mouth. In our two years there, there were no
supermarkets. You went to the open market, you
bought your little parcel of food, and you used it
up in a day or two, and then you went back to the
market again. We got to Panama, into the Canal
Zone, and suddenly, You could take long showers
with hot water and you go out and there's a
refrigerator and you look in there and there's all
this stuff. It's just beyond belief that
everything could be so easy. You had difficulty
making decisions. Even when you went back and you
went to the stores, supermarkets, and so forth,
you were so overwhelmed by the variety and the
packaging and so forth, you had forgotten about
all this sort of thing. And it made such an impact on
you that it was difficult to deal with. You were
used to having your little string bag and having
everything in a raw state with no packaging. And
then here is all this stuff that's sort of triple
packaged. And not only is there not one variety of
these things, but there's 16 of them to choose
from. And you have difficulty making your
purchases. And you're just sort of awestruck. And
so it took us a while to get back into, the idea that
we do have so much and so many opportunities and
we're sort of, I don't know if you would call it
wasteful, but it's certainly a different kind of
way to do You know, you're selling and buying, and
it's so different from the basic nature of things
in Bolivia or any of the third world countries.
So I guess that was, that was definitely a culture
shock for us.
just the idea of driving again in automobiles. You
don't do it for two years, you're sort of in public
transit.
as you get back on the road, and everything seems to
be moving much faster, you know, when you get back.
And so you're almost sort of bewildered for a
while, until things begin to come back into focus.
It's just something that we notice, and we weren't
quite prepared for. And then you're sort of
bombarded with things like television, We did
have radio there that we listened to quite a lot,
but certainly there was no TV.
That was certainly something that we had to get
used to again.
Because we were there continuously for two years.
We did have some time when we would take little
trips. We did take a trip over to Peru. But for the
most part, we were sort of in that environment
continuously for the whole duration.
Have you ever done that? We did take the children
when we were in Argentina. We took a trip back to La
Paz and we went to Abraha's little hospital where
David was born. We showed the kids the apartment
where we had spent our Peace Corps days and kind of
retraced some of our old steps. I think it was
really a nostalgic trip for us. I'm not sure that
the kids got too much out of it, but certainly they
were pretty young at the time.
They probably remember some of it, but probably
not too much. Mostly, when they go back and look at
the photo albums of that period, you can
continually refresh at a time when you can take it
all in. and actually think you're remembering all
that stuff, but actually you're just remembering
the stories that your parents tell you, and you
reinforce that with the pictures, and you know you
were there, and how much they actually
remember. I appreciate it. Okay.